Well, let's go and hear from Pat.
You could just let me know when Pat's online
so I can start proceeding.
Izzy, that would be brilliant.
Of course. It's coming through now.
And we have Pat for how many minutes? Five. Yes.
Brilliant. Are you there, pat?
Hello? Hello? Hello? Pat, are you there?
Pat, you need to accept the promotion
to be a panelist in order to speak to the committee.
Do we have you, pat, or are you, uh, still, uh,
working through your tech?
Um, we've not been able to promote Pat, Mr.
She, I'll try one more time.
Pat, could you please accept the promotion to be a panelist?
Okay. They've declined. Um,
We can move across to our next, um,
submitter is Izzy, which is whom?
Um, Aaron Macy. We'll move to Aaron Macy now.
Very good, Lee. Thank you. Izzy.
No trouble.
Gilda. Hello Aaron. How are you sir? It's Mark Cameron.
Uh, you're welcome. Welcome
to the primary production Select committee.
We have Rachel Boyer, again, others,
miles Anderson to talk to you today.
We have you for five minutes, Aaron.
Um, so please lead off
with your thoughts on the pork industry and where we take it
and, um, and maybe if you leave a bit of time,
we've got a few moments for questions at the end.
Cool. Thank you. Um, yeah. Well, my name is Aaron Macy.
Um, I reside in Canterbury and I'm a student.
Um, I really came on here today
to put my face to my submission.
I presume you guys have read my submission,
so I won't go over all the points.
Um, I think this is a really important bill
to be discussing, um,
and ultimately, well, if he has huge issues
with animal welfare standards being upheld,
my primary issue is with what this bill does
to the rule of law
and the, the previous findings of the high courts
and ruling current crates were an illegal practice.
Um, I believe that the Animal Welfare Act
is very clear in its intentions to promote animal welfare.
Uh, and that's not at the promote animal welfare
in a way that economic, uh, issues don't
overthrow the welfare of animals.
Um, yeah.
So my submission really is about, uh, this,
this bill not encompassing the spirit
of the animal welfare Acts 1999,
and it using regulatory loopholes
to go about subverting the,
the process in which a code
of welfare would normally be made.
And at the end of the day, while this is making an amendment
to the primary acts, is really going about
to create a new code of welfare for pigs.
Um, given the short amount of time
that submissions were open for the select committee, uh,
and, and also some of the comments that the,
this government has made, uh,
when this bill was announced about it being a win
for animal welfare, I find completely disingenuous.
It's another example of
how the democratic process is being eroded in this country.
We rely on the courts to uphold
and interpret the laws that the government
and the legislator make.
We have had that happen in 2020.
We had it found that the use of these crates were illegal.
And yeah, I just think it's a, it's, it's kind
of disgusting in my opinion.
Um, again, not to do with the animal welfare issues,
which are real, uh,
but for the abhorrent way in which this bill
is being passed and, uh, how it signifies, uh,
sorry, not signifies.
It's a, another example of legislation being rushed through
as a knee jerk reaction
and it's not well thought out good law.
Mm-hmm. Um, those were my major points.
So I'm open to some questions.
So, uh, well, I'll lead off Aaron.
I'm not quite sure, uh,
what my colleagues are currently doing,
but I'm sure they'll have several questions.
You say that it's expedited, uh, piece of legislation
and by virtue it's, um, it's a dis
disingenuous engagement with the constituency.
How do you square then, Aaron, that,
that there's a regulatory hole in the law, uh,
that is being amended under the advice of the minister
and his officials in Naac,
and I'm sure you are aware who Naac is.
How do you square that?
There will be a cessation of one set
of regulations before the new ones were implemented,
and this, this build change is seeking to fill that hole
so there aren't pig farmers with no laws regulating them
in this regulatory gap.
So how do you square that?
Yeah, so what you've just presented is a false dichotomy.
There is not the only two options of going through
with the law as it is now,
or creating a law that creates suffering in, uh,
for pigs for a really long time.
There are workarounds.
Um, I understand that it's a really, uh,
it's a really big thing for the industry
to, to make these changes.
And that's why I think
that the government should be supporting
farmers to make these changes.
But at the end of the day, just
because this primary industry is struggling,
that's not a good enough reason to
go against the welfare of animals.
And it's actually enshrined in the legislation that economic
issues cannot be a reason
that animal welfare is pushed down.
Thank you. Aaron, do you have any
further questions? Uh, members,
Uh, no, but thank you for your submission, Aaron.
Really clear points of view. Thank you. Appreciate it. I, I
Would like to make one more, um, comment.
Yes, please. Briefly,
if you could be so kind, Aaron. Thank you.
Sweet. Um, yeah, I just,
um, I was just looking at your bio mark on your ACT website,
and it literally says the challenges to dealing
with the government inspectors turning up on the farm.
And I just like to highlight that I understand
that your position within the government,
but that just seems like a very big conflict of interest
to have you, uh, being the chair of this person
who is literally making a law amendment about
government inspectors coming up
and being able to turn up to a farm. Um,
Oh, I, I, I just respond to that.
Um, I, I, I don't make decisions on behalf of the committee.
A committee makes decisions by resolution,
so I have a totally different opinion to your statement,
but I appreciate your opinions are your opinions.
Uh, I chair a committee, which is very collegial,
and we work through issues, uh, by, by majority.
Um, and that just happens to be currently the government.
It's often the other way. So thank you for your opinions.
Um, I'm, I'm grateful for them.
Uh, and, um, I, I, I will leave it to the next, uh,
submitter to square up what he thinks and doesn't think so.
Thank you, Aaron or she. Thank you very much for your time.
Um, Mr. Chair, we will now try Pat basket again.
What we're gonna do is rather than promote to panelists,
we'll just allow to speak from the attendee role
so you won't be able to see Pat,
but ideally should be able to hear
That.
Thank you, Izzy. Always grateful my, my dear.
Thank you so much.
Right, thank you.
Hello, pat. Good morning.
Welcome to the pri welcome
to the Primary Production Select committee.
We have you for five minutes, sir.
We're very grateful for your time,
and I'll leave it with you, and if you would be obliging
to leave a few moments for questions.
Okay. Thank you. Uh, thank you for this opportunity
to persuade you to vote against the animal welfare amendment
bill that's currently before the house.
In expressing my concerns about
how this bill will perpetuate the inhumane treatment
of pigs, I, uh,
will put the issue in a wider context.
But I'd like to start by asking, how many
of you have a cat or a dog at home?
Um, if you do, you'll understand the basic needs of animals,
like, um, those that you look
after in your homes, the wider context
population increase worldwide.
And the challenges of climate change mean we have
to ask basic questions about the economics
of food production.
Now, it's not the same world as, uh, when I,
or maybe you grew up growing crops to feed animals
in order to feed people is poor economics.
When animal agriculture was domestic,
meat production was integrated into the local economy.
Now, industrialization of, uh,
animal agriculture means that most
of the maize grown in the US
and the Sawyer in Argentina goes to industrialized
feedlots for cattle and pigs around the world.
The conditions which these animals are forced to endure
make a mockery of minister hoard's attempt to
postpone improvements in pigs confinement.
He claims that come 2035 New Zealand will have the
strictest animal welfare regulations in the world,
but that could have been now
if the existing law had been allowed to stand.
In the meantime, we will allow pig farmers
to confine millions of these intelligent animals for up
to 33 days in crates, in which they can only roll over
the seven days That will be allowed in 2035.
They should be zero and mating stalls.
The current seven days becomes three hours.
But you know all this, but what an admission
of prolonged in humanity and animal cruelty.
Those of you who have pets will also know that if you did
to your animals what you condone being done to these pigs,
you would be arrested and find.
You will also be familiar with the statistics
of New Zealand's pork industry
and know that not all producers use these appalling methods.
Now, remind you, I think it's approximately 42% of pork
is produced on free farms here,
but we could have joined those countries who've already
banned farrowing crates and m stalls
and allowed only free range pig farms.
We could have supported those
who use em the moment to make these changes.
We could have endorsed this policy by allowing imported pork
only from countries with similar bans.
And you are familiar with those statistics,
how much bacon you eat.
And ham here comes from countries where, um,
they do not have good animal welfare regulations.
But the ensuing price rises if we had endorsed this policy
and spread it around, would've made evident to consumers.
The real cost of eating pork in this climate changed world
of shrinking resources for water
and land meat must become an expensive delicacy.
It will, in fact, inevitably become an expensive delicacy.
If we can't afford the full cost
of producing it, we shouldn't eat it.
Please reject this bill, which reflects the immediate
and short-term interest expressed by the industry body.
That's all I have to say. Thank you.
Very, very, very grateful, pat,
for your submission this morning.
Thank you so much for, uh, how,
how passionate you are about the industry
and where it should take itself.
Members. Do we have any questions for Pat this morning?
I cannot see anyone. Rachel, do you have a question at all?
No. Thank you, pat. Very clear submission
and point of view and appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you, Rachel. Um, there appear to be no questions.
Pat, thank you so much for your time. Okay.
We've remain very grateful as a, as a committee
for varying opinions and how we take this bill forward.
So thank you for your time this morning.
Okay. And yours, Dear Cheerio, take care.
Goodbye. Okay, Mr.
Chair, we now have Sarah Spencer, who is online.
Thank you. Thank you, Izzy. Good morning, Sarah.
Can we, can you hear the committee
and see the committee, uh, at all, Sarah?
I can. Good morning. Good morning. Welcome to the pri.
Good morning. Welcome
to the Primary Production Select Committee.
Thank you so much for your time this morning. This morning.
We are very grateful for your time.
We have you for five minutes.
Sarah, if you would keep your introductory remarks,
moderately brief, um, I'm sure my, uh,
my dear members will have questions for you.
Thank you so much.
Great Kiara, and good morning to everybody.
Thanks for the opportunity to speak today.
Um, I felt it was really important to, um,
join in on this conversation.
I've followed the issue for years.
Um, I am from mid Canterbury originally,
grew up in a small rural town.
Spent my childhood on farms, worked on farms, um,
understand what farming is actually like.
Our school trips to freezing works showed me
how meat was produced.
I became, um, quite aware from a young age
how we get our food.
Um, it distressed me as the years went by,
um, to see factory farming and the demand,
but also balanced.
I could see the struggles of the farmer and what that means.
So when I come to this,
I come from a really mixed background
of understanding this issue from one side of the fence
and the country farm
and to the other side, becoming an, a member of the
safe group when I was 15.
It's 42 years later,
and I still stand on the steps of parliament with my banners
for getting these chickens and pigs out of cages.
So in 2020, there I was feeling great
that we were getting somewhere
with Gareth Hughes there helping us, um, going
to the high court
for the decision which we were overjoyed had happened.
And I thought for the farming community,
this would actually provide at last some clarity of
what they could expect to happen.
I knew that this would be a big deal.
There is changes for their whole production,
their whole farming practice.
But for me, when I see an animal in a cage that can't turn
around and I see a free range practice,
which does take a lot more work
and staff, I really get that.
But the product on the world stage puts New Zealand
as a country who actually values their animals
and how we care for them.
That to me, and I've spoken to many farmers on this,
and I know how conflicting it can be to try
and deal with the challenges they face.
So I just wanted to speak up on that realistic view
that I feel we are becoming a culture
and a country that doesn't actually get
where our bacon comes from in the pack and save shelves.
That people are pretty much buying stuff in plastic
and not understanding it by speaking up on this issue
and seeing a bill that is being
very quickly pushed through
and it's have to refer to the first submitter, the hour.
And you put that pretty clearly.
I'm not feeling that as a very, uh,
a trustworthy democratic process either.
So I'm speaking on a couple of things there
that I'm not happy on that count.
And I'd love your committee to be able to go into parliament
to recommend that this bill is not put
through at all on the grounds of the care of the animals,
the, the, the, the process that has been pushed through
that I cannot see if I had not received the information on
this, I'm so grateful I got the chance
to put the submission in.
If I hadn't heard from my good old safe friends
that this was an issue to speak up on,
I probably wouldn't have known about it.
So I think we're getting a small snapshot
of people here speaking,
but I know there is a huge wider community in New Zealand
that would be behind this, and I know they are.
So I really just wanted to say that, um,
I think it's very important that we show in this country,
and it's not popular sometimes to speak up and push back.
And I have, I have seen firsthand what a small group
of people can do in a little group to make change.
And we can do this on this one.
Farmers will have a clear understanding now.
It's a bit like the earthquake strengthening.
It's been going on for a while.
Nobody knew what was happening.
We now will have that, and that ruling should be upheld.
So thank you for this opportunity,
and I, I hope that, um,
we can actually make this change for good.
Thank you, Sarah. Thank you for your submission.
Uh, members, do we have any questions at all
for Sarah while we have her online?
No. Sarah, there appear to be none.
Thank you very, very much.
Just very quickly, if I can, um, I've got a quick question.
If, if time allows me, how do you feel that we square up,
um, where we're going as an industry, the difficulties
that farmers face,
and as you said, it's a very active minority, that seems
to be the loudest voice against this,
but do you think
that people's moral compass is interfering in private
business a little too much?
Or is that an accepted reality where people
that don't farm tell those that do how they should do it?
How do, how do you square that, um,
in society, do you think? Very quickly?
Yeah, I really get that, um, about people speaking up
that have no idea what the average farmer
and person is dealing with.
It. It really, um, that's why I felt I had to speak
because I have been there.
I've mucked out the cages, I've done the work.
I've seen what it takes, what I think we need.
If here's the problem that's happening in our society,
if we don't start on this level
and make a change, we will continue to produce food
and animals in huge quantities
for a demanding population that has no idea
where this food is coming from
and how these animals are raised.
So there, there isn't a great answer to that question,
actually, mark, because I feel that
the industry needs to change.
It's like David Longe standing up
for the nuclear issue.
It's, it's time to stand up and make that change.
It's like the climate, it's not easy,
but we have far too many people demanding a pork
and a ham on their tables that they do not understand
how they are raised.
They have to be smaller productions.
We just shouldn't be morally having
animals in cages.
And I know the farrowing process
and two to three times a year with the litter,
and I know that the regulations are coming back down to say,
we want these pigs prior to the farrowing
and the week after.
I know they're trying to lessen the time in the cages.
The reality, if we leave it and,
and if we try to ignore this, um, uh,
high court ruling, we are going
to get farmers who will take it.
There will always be some who will push the limits.
And I just feel it's wrong that we have that chance
that we are gonna mistreat animals
for longer than is necessary.
I'm sorry, I don't think I actually answered
Properly. No, no, thank you.
Loophole for you.
But I, I just feel it's unfortunate,
but we have to make a stand
and I'd like it to be people
that understand the background too.
So that would be a way for me, if I could,
I could be on a committee that to say that if we could
do this from people who understand,
rather than people sitting at their desks in Wellington
saying, this is what we should be doing.
I'd like to have a rural community behind me to say,
and there are who think it's wrong. But, um,
Yeah. So I don't mean to
interrupt. Thank you
so much for your passion.
Thank you for answering my question.
I, I know it was a difficult one.
I hope you have a lovely day
and, um, we'll, we'll see, uh,
what the next submitters have to say.
Uh, have a cracking good day. Thank you so much.
Great. Thank you, Cheerio. Take care.
Bye Mr. Chair. We now move to Christopher Romy.
Thank you, Izzy. Good morning.
Christopher, are you there? Christopher?
Good morning. Can you see me and hear me?
Yes, sir. We can hear you.
I can't see you, but I'm sure my colleagues can
thank you so much for your time.
We're very grateful for your time this morning.
We have you for five minutes. Oh,
there you go. We can see you.
Oh, great. Hello. Great.
Thank you mate. Great to have you online please. Good
Morning. Um, uh,
I urge you to, uh, reject this amendment bill.
Um, I'd just like to very quickly describe this,
my animal shelter here.
So if I had to keep sheep
and milk, she for seven years to fully understand
what the requirements are of, of these animals.
So this space here is a space
of about three meters by two meters.
And they can come outta the paddock
and use this space by choice.
They continuously use it.
It has a hard floor,
and it has a hard roof with three meters of rain.
They need it, and they get excited when they come here.
Lambs come here, the milking sheep come here,
it's highlight for them.
So you can see they're running around
inside and playing in here.
Now, what if I take this date?
Now they're running, if I take this date
and I now make this space an enclosed space.
So previously that three meter
by two meter space was a wonderful place
where they wanted to be in play.
What if I enclose this space now?
So an animal that's in this space now,
it isn't such a good space now.
It's actually, um, not such a good place to live.
They can't escape from it.
What if we bring this here now, bring it in more?
So now I've made this
space even narrower.
So in two steps,
I've made this shelter from a wonderful place
to an abominable place.
Um, and so that's basically my submission in brief,
why the amendment, uh, should be rejected
by the select committee because I consider it to be cruel.
And I spend a lot of time in this batch with these animals,
milking these animals, tending these animals.
I spend a lot of time thinking about what it's like
for other animals that live in confined spaces,
and I do findable.
So thank you very much.
Thank you, Chris. Thank you so much.
What a wonderful, um, submission.
I like the, the illustration, uh,
and live fire as it, as it, so, great submission, mate.
We're very grateful for it.
Do we have questions from members for Chris Wa here?
Uh, um, just speak up if you've got questions.
Sorry, Tim, I can't see you Wall.
No, Chris, there don't seem to be any questions.
Again, again, mate, I,
I wanna thank you for your submission.
We are genuinely very grateful as a committee.
We often don't get these kind of, um, in,
in-house submissions where we can see actively
what people are thinking
and how they see it in the real world.
So thank you for your submission.
We're genuine, genuinely very grateful for it.
Uh, it helps us digest
where we take the legislation forward.
So thank you again and have a great day. Thank
You very much.
Cheerio, Chris. Take care. Cheers,
Thank you.
Who have we got online now? Izzy?
Uh, we now move to Walt Cavendish. Mr. Chair.
Oh, Walt. Yes, I know Walt well. Are you there, Walt?
I am. And yourself. Good to see you as always.
You health healthy? Um, yeah, up down. Well, I'm northern.
You're in the white. Always good to see you.
Mark, we have, we have you for five minutes.
Thank you so much for your submission.
You can take it as read
and, um, please well, um, speak your truth as you see it.
And, and, and I'm sure we, we'll have many questions
for you after the fact.
So I'll leave it in your capable hands.
Thank you, mark. Thank you.
Look, um, fundamentally I don't support the extending the
transition to 2035.
I I don't think there's any justification for that.
You know, the pork industry's been on notice for, uh, uh,
a considerable period of time.
And if we look at the poultry industry, uh,
where they had the 10 year lead in to get rid
of battery cages in New Zealand, um, a lot
of it didn't happen until right toward the end.
There was a heck of a rush. There was a shortage of eggs.
So the industry had 10 years to get rid of battery cages,
and they sat on their hands and did nothing.
And I just think that, you know,
the pork industry in this country's not that big.
Um, there's other examples, for example,
in California under proposition, um, 12
where they gave their producers, um, five years, um, to, um,
where they put the bill through.
And then it was enforced five years later.
And I think in New Zealand here,
we really should only be looking at a two year, um,
transition, or maybe
three at the most, I think would be suitable.
Otherwise, people are just gonna
sit on their hands and do nothing.
And, um, I don't think that's fair on the farmers
that have already, uh, made these changes, uh,
in their, in their systems.
But I think the fundamental thing is,
it doesn't really matter too much on this from my point
of view, my real problem is that we are not incentivizing,
uh, the pork industry in this country.
They are competing against subsidized pork,
lower wealthier pork and all these things.
And in New Zealand, we say we don't want farrowing crates,
we don't want mating stalls
and all these sorts of things,
which is absolutely wonderful.
It's in line with our animal welfare beliefs
that came out in, um, 1999.
But while we hold our farmers
to the highest standards on animal welfare,
and I'm a farmer, you are a farmer, you know, we all have
to follow these high animal welfare standards.
And we do it, um, because we, uh, we love our animals,
but there is a financial cost to this.
And if we are asking our farmers to meet these standards,
then we have to be prepared to take some action.
And I really think that this particular bill should be tied
to something like Steve Abel's, uh, members bill, uh,
the animal products closing the welfare gap amendment bill,
and have the two go together so that we make sure
that what's coming into this country meets the same
standards that New Zealand pig farmers are required
by law to meet.
And unless we do that, you know,
our industry's not going to go anywhere.
Uh, we produce some of the best pork in the world,
but we are hamstrung because when you go to a supermarket
and you get your salamis and your hams
and your bacons, it's all from imported pork
that don't meet any many of these standards.
And I would ask the committee to very seriously consider
advising the government to tie the two things together.
Because if we believe in animal welfare, which we do,
then the two go hand in hand.
And I think that really what's happened here is the
ministers decided to put this, this 10 year transition in,
uh, to appease the industry.
But at the same time, it's beneficial
because it stops people like me
who have been advocating very firmly
to close this welfare gap.
Because by putting the farrowing crate ban out 10 years,
the government can argue, well actually, you know,
the imports are meeting the same standards
as our pig farmers at the, and to me, that's just not right.
We, we are actually going backwards in animal, uh, welfare
instead of going forwards.
And you as a committee have the ability to,
to debate, you know, sort of re re uh,
massage this into something that's gonna deliver both
for animal welfare, but for this country.
And you've got a very, um, serious job to do.
And I would ask you to consider, um,
putting animal welfare first,
but at the same time, remembering
that there are farmers out there that
this will really affect.
And there has to be a balancing line.
But I think 10 year transition is just too long.
It throws it way down the road by a decade.
And I think we need to be a little bit more, um, aggressive,
I think, and, and get that transfer happening, uh, sooner,
that transition happening sooner,
but at the same time, remembering
that our farmers do compete unfairly.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Always a pleasure, Walt.
Uh, you articulate yourself beautifully and,
and I'm grateful for your passion.
Uh, members, do we have a, uh, yes.
Line of questions for Walt? Rachel? I've got
A couple, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, please. Hi, Walt, Rachel here.
Nice to see you. And, um, thanks so much for your advocacy.
Um, I've got a couple of quite specific questions about, um,
I I totally take your point around the, um,
the connection with, um, international, um, trade
and those requirements.
It would probably be advised to us that it'll be out
of the scope for the bill, but I, I, I take your points.
Um, what I'm, I've got two lines
of questioning for you really.
The first is, so the 10 year transition period doesn't
actually lead to a, a a, a ban in farrowing crates.
It would just change some, um, rules around, uh,
how they can be used and for how long
and their size and things.
I'm quite interested in your thoughts on farrowing crates
and in in general.
Um, because as a committee, we are hearing
two quite different points of view from, uh,
people across the community.
So from, um, advisors from, uh,
animal welfare rights organizations
and from, um, uh, uh, from farmers as well,
uh, about whether they are good
or bad for pig and piglet welfare.
So I'm, I'm actually genuinely interested in your thoughts
on the use and what you would see as the best way
to ensure animal welfare, um, uh, for pigs
and piglets, just generally.
I think, um, I think seven days is a, is a balanced,
is a balanced number because I mean, whether you do
or whether you don't, you're either gonna have a higher
piglet mortality rate by getting rid of them entirely
or by having a longer faring period.
You may have your piglet a less piglet death,
but you're gonna have a sour that's, that's restrained
for a longer period of time.
So there has to be a balance.
And I think seven days seems reasonable to me.
And some of the farmers I've talked to, um, have said, well,
what about aggressive sours?
You know, if you have aggressive sour,
it's one argument they make
to wanting a longer term of faring.
And I say, well, you unfortunately just call that sour
because I mean, if she's a risk to you,
you don't really want her.
Um, but I think seven days,
I think it's a fair, a fair period of time.
It's what I would advocate for and what I stand by.
I'm not a, I'm not for a zero faring pr I think sevens
Very good answer.
Walt. Um, Rachel, you had another question for Walt while we
Oh, no, I actually tied my
question into a statement, sorry.
No, no.
Um, very quickly, any members,
any other questions for Walt?
Um, he's a great submitter, so, um,
any other thoughts there?
There appear to be none, Walt. Thank you so much, mate.
Um, I think Rachel's right.
I think there's a lot to discuss, uh, in regards
to Steve Abels bill,
and, you know, given that it's not in the scope
of this legislation, it would certainly be a MEUs argument
to and discussion to have.
So thank you for raising that
and, um, we look forward to seeing you again.
Yes, I'll, I'll see you again, mark.
I've tactually joined your party,
so you'll be hearing a lot more from me now.
Bless you. Thank you. Bloody legend.
Well, you mate, always well and happy farming and talk soon.
You too. Cheers, mark. Thank you.
Cheer, we, um,
we now have Sarah online, I believe.
Yes. Good morning Committee members, uh, thank you
for this opportunity to speak to my submission.
Can you hear me all right? Yes,
Sarah, we lovely to speak. Great. So much for your
Time. Um, great.
Thank you.
Um, thank you for this opportunity, uh,
to speak in opposition to the animal welfare amendment Bill.
Um, I understand that submissions are being taken as read,
however, um, I only received notification
of the speaking opportunity yesterday afternoon, so
I will be referring to my submission.
Mm-hmm. Um, I wish, I wish to begin
with a quote from Gandhi, uh, the greatness of a nation
and its moral progress.
And I would add that of a government can be judged
by the way its animals are treated.
Point one. In 2020,
the high court declared the minimum standards
and regulations that permit Faron crates
and mating stalls for pigs were invalid
and unlawful under the Animal Welfare Act 1999.
It's my understanding the court did so
because the use of these crates did not meet the animal
welfare its obligations to ensure physical health
and behavioral needs of animals, including the opportunity
to display normal patterns of behavior.
The government's now proposing to change this law
to make the use of these intensive confinement systems
for pigs legal by embedding the cages into this act.
In my view, this undermines the court's judgment
and the rule of law.
Um, it's my understanding that dev, uh, point to,
it's my understanding that developed countries with bans
or restrictions on such methods
include the entire eu, Sweden, Switzerland, Norway,
and several American states.
The uk, um, are moving toward phasing out Faron crates,
recognizing that they don't meet public expectations.
And it's my view that New Zealand should adhere
to similar standards of practice 0.3.
It's my understanding that the economic analysis
that have been undertaken to support the proposed amendment
were conducted with significant input from New Zealand Pork
New Zealand port, also provide much of the industry data.
It's therefore my view
that this does not necessarily constitute independent
economic evidence 0.4.
Um, in my opinion, it's vital that best practice policy
or regulation making,
and in this case, this is the development of regulations
that provide a good standard of care for farmed pigs.
Um, give it, it, it's, yeah, it's vital
that best practice policy
or regulation making gives equal weight to all evidence.
Um, it's also, um, my opinion
that there can be an inherent bias
that elevates economic outcomes
and evidence above other evidence
that addresses sometimes less, um, ostensibly quantifiable
or normative issues.
Uh, in this case, other evidence can include
such things as verified evidence
regarding animal welfare and wellbeing.
And that's specifically provisioned for adequate space
that's room to move,
and behavioral needs that allow animals
to express natural behaviors
and also the prevention as far as reasonable or stress.
I think another important, um, uh, type
of evidence is the public
or consumer opinion, um, regarding a reasonable standard
of treatment for farmed animals in the production of pork.
This wider evidence, this wider range of evidence should,
in my view, be weighted equally alongside
any economic evidence.
On the seventh of this month, that's October, 2025.
Marcelo Ferre, an associate professor
of law at the Auckland Law School, had the following
to say in an article for the newsroom,
mating stalls are used to make artificial insemination
of a sour an easier process for the inseminator.
And Faron crates are used when a sow is giving birth to
and feeding her piglets,
although there are some differences between them.
They both achieve the same ends.
They prevent the sow from turning around,
just let that sink in.
The sow cannot turn turnaround,
nor can she care for her piglets as she normally would.
It's hard for us bipeds to imagine what that would be like,
but think about being stuck in an economy class seat
for seven days, having just given birth in that seat.
It starts to get us in the ballpark of
how cruel this practice is.
Thanks again for the speaking opportunity,
and I'm very happy to take any questions.
Uh, Sarah, that has been a great and fulsome submission.
Thank you so much for the points
that you've laid out quite succinctly, uh, once through
to seven and eight.
So members, do we have any questions
for Sarah while we have her here this morning?
No. Sarah, there appear to be none.
Thank you so much for your fulsome submission. Um,
Thank you again. Thank you very much
And I'm very, very grateful for your time.
I'm very succinct and your points of view.
So thank you Sarah, for your time, uh,
Cheerio and have a great day. Thank
You.
Izzy, who do we now have online?
I can't see the next person.
Mr. Chair, we now have Rob McNeil.
Rob mc McNeil. Fantastic. Rob, are you there this morning?
I am here. Can you hear me and see me? Yes, sir.
Good morning. Thank you so much for your time.
We're very grateful for your time. Rob.
Um, we have you for five minutes.
Um, thank you so much for being here.
Please by all means offer some introductory remarks
and then my members, hopefully we'll have questions for you.
Yeah, thanks for the opportunity.
Uh, in full disclosure, I am the executive president
of the Animal Justice Party,
but we're making a separate submission
as a group, uh, at another time.
So this is my own personal comments.
Um, I wouldn't, uh, be doing justice to a friend
of mine if I, if I didn't submit orally today.
Uh, I lived in Canada for a number of years,
and for a brief period of about two months,
I had a pig living in my apartment with me.
Uh, she was, uh, a breed over there called a Potbelly,
which is a little smaller than a captain cooker.
And she was, uh, an unexpected arrival at a sanctuary that,
uh, that needed somewhere to be.
Uh, she was absolutely amazing.
She was as, uh, as smarter than a,
smarter than my cat, no doubt.
Um, never saw the irony of, uh, of using an old, uh,
roasting pan as a litter box, uh, was, was very clean, uh,
would scratch herself against my electric guitar and, uh,
and, and, and happily snuggle.
So I wouldn't be doing justice if I didn't introduce, uh,
you to Piggly Wiggly briefly
and say that, uh, pigs are are beautiful sentient creatures
that, uh, that deserve, uh, respect.
Look, this, uh, this law change, uh,
seemed like a, a no brainer.
Um, over a hundred thousand as I understood it,
signed a petition in 2018, uh,
against this practice in the high court as I understood it,
uh, rendered this, uh, this illegal.
So, while it's unfortunate that nothing was done, uh,
during the 10 years, uh, this reversal seems quite, uh,
anti-democratic being rushed through.
Obviously it technically follows the process,
but rushing it through when, you know, 98%
of Kiwis say they're against animal cruelty,
and there are bans either in place
or coming in in the eu, the uk
and in many US states, it seems, uh, it seems ridiculous.
It's unfortunate that, uh, that this practice, uh,
is gonna be allowed to continue for another 10 years
and then only change briefly.
And I think, uh, unfortunately it does highlight, uh,
the inherent cruelty in, in a lot of,
uh, animal agriculture.
But this particular one, along with, uh, you know,
banning live export seemed like a a no-brainer.
And it's, it's, it's really unfortunate.
And, um, you know, respectfully, I can only hope that it's,
that it's punished at, uh, at the ballot boxes by voters.
My hope is, my wish is that, uh, labor
and green will, uh, will promise
to reverse this and act, act quickly.
And while, uh, I respect the, the desire to support farmers,
as I understand it, a lot
of the current producers have already switched.
And how do you reconcile it to those, those ones
that have anticipated this,
this ban and made accommodations?
It seems now it's an unplayable unlevel playing field, uh,
as being with the animal justice party.
You're never gonna get me to say that there's a,
a reasonable use of faring crates
or a, a reasonable transition period.
But, um, I just, I just had to speak up today
and say that this is, uh, this is not right.
And it's, it seems almost arrogant respectfully to, to just
give what appears to be whatever the pork industry wanted,
um, the pig flesh industry, uh, rather than, uh,
rather than respect the decisions of the courts and, uh,
and the will of the New Zealand people in, uh, in the past.
So that's, uh, that's really all I've got to, to say.
And I'm, I, I've been inside some of these, uh,
factory farms and pig farms in, in North America,
and they're, they're vulnerable places.
I, I really do wish people would understand when they,
when they order their bacon, uh, that
somebody goes out the back and, and,
and kills a, a, a wee young piggy.
But, uh, for now, focusing on these regulations, I just, uh,
I hope sanity prevails
and I hope the committee, uh, recommends, uh, not, not, uh,
giving us change as as written.
So I'm happy for the opportunity
and, uh, open to any questions the committee may have.
Thank you, Rob. Questions members?
Uh, yep, I've got one. Yeah, you go. Um, similar question.
I dunno if you saw Walt's submission.
Rob, always nice to see you, by the way, Rob.
Um, I dunno if you saw my question to Walt,
but I've got a similar question for you, I guess, which is,
um, so we get advice, um, for on the, the pros
and cons of Farrow in crates.
And the, the main one is,
and this is the advice we received,
so I'm not saying this is my opinion,
but I'm just saying this is the advice we receive, um, is
that, um, uh, farrow in crates can actually protect piglets
and reduce piglet mortality.
So I'm just interested in whether you've looked at the
science of that, looked at research on that,
and, um, whether you've got any thoughts on, um, on
that particular argument that's put forward.
Right. Question. I, I'm not an expert on these matters.
As I said, you know, with the animal justice party,
I'm not gonna condone, uh, any use.
As I understand it, there are jurisdictions,
significant ones that no longer use fair and crates.
Uh, and while, you know, I'd like to see the industry end,
uh, totally, um, as I understand it,
in Canada there are some groups like maple leaf foods
that have experienced, uh, that,
that have experimented significantly
and commercially with group housing for pigs
that doesn't involve, um, doesn't involve crates at all.
And, you know, lets the,
lets the mothers express their natural behavior.
I imagine the, the abominations genetically
that we've created now do have more trouble caring
for their young than, uh,
than the traditional wide wild boars.
But it's, it's hard for me to believe that there isn't a,
there isn't a mother that would do her best for her,
for her piglets, uh, whatever their eventual fate may be.
I dunno if that directly answers your question,
but that's, that's what I've got
and it's great to see you too, Rachel.
Great question. Ra Rachel, thank you.
Uh, Rob, I've got a quick question.
How do you square that the industry has collapsed
in numbers over the decades?
That's a sort of a two part question.
Um, and, and knowing
and withstanding that the largest portion of pork in,
in New Zealand that is consumed
comes from those jurisdictions with poor animal welfare
standards, and that we are our nation ever hungrier.
So how do you square all of that up?
And do you believe that the,
that if the pork industry met its end, given the, the, the,
the constrictions or constraints that they feel, uh,
are economically no longer viable, uh,
that you would be upset about them sort
of falling off the radar per say?
Or would it be a case of, well, you know,
they did their best, but the economic reality wasn't
suitable, so they're out.
So how do, how do you square up all
of those difficulties in a, in a society where approaching
so, so incredibly expensive?
Well, um, let's see, where do I start with that?
The, uh, the, I would've given a different answer 10 years
ago, but there's no question that humans, uh,
I would say now humans can survive
without, without bacon and pork.
Um, in terms of deregulation of the industry, you know,
industries do change and, uh, a lot
of New Zealand farming industries were essentially,
you know, deregulated many years ago.
And some have thrived and some have not.
I definitely want to support farmers in
transitioning away from that.
And, and there was talk earlier in the submissions about the
need to, to potentially support a transition away from it.
But frankly, you know, if if New Zealand, uh, uh,
pig farmers cannot, uh, compete without the absolute barest
of, of welfare standards, then, then
that industry, uh, needs to change.
Um, there's no lack of protein in, in,
in non-animal products.
And, uh, I enjoy my, my, my vegan plant-based,
uh, bacon very much.
Um, you know, I support for all people.
I've, I've, you know, share milked, I've, uh,
milked cows when I was, when I was a young fella,
and I, I know how hard farmers work
and, uh, people have invested in businesses
and they need to be supported.
But gee, this one is, is the absolute,
absolute simplest barest thing that,
uh, aligns with the public.
And I would, I would caution the farming industry for asking
for a continuation of practices like this.
Less, less, uh, less the public's, uh,
opinion turns on on other things as well.
Thank you, Rob. Thank you.
Very, very, very salient answer, uh, and succinct as well.
So thank you so much for your time this morning.
We're very grateful for your time.
Um, it helps us make a an informed decision moving forward.
So have a great day, Rob. Thank you.
Thank you. Same to you
V Very, very good. Thanks
Rob. So we've got Sarah online,
is that correct? Is he,
No, we now move to Louise Van,
who I believe is our last submitter of the day.
Apologies. Um, members, we're going to hear from Louise.
Thanks very much. Uh, hopefully you're online.
Louise,
you there?
Louise? Hi. Hello. Good, good morning.
Welcome to the primary Production Select committee.
Thank you very much for your time this morning.
It's always very precious to hear from submitters.
I'll leave it with you and we'll have questions at the end.
Okay, cool. First of all, I'd last like to thank you
for giving me this opportunity to speak to you on behalf
of all the pigs suffering silently in New Zealand, alongside
with thousands of other New Zealanders,
were extremely disappointed that animals are getting
so treated, so cruelly without the
government stepping in and stopping in.
New Zealand should lead the charge on animal rights.
Back in November, 2020, farmers had five years to rectified
how they cared and housed for their pigs.
And now farmers are asking for more time.
Why should the pigs have to suffer any longer?
Because farmers don't wanna change their ways,
don't wanna have a heart and don't wanna spend money which
these poor pigs have actually earned by having no choice
but to give up their freedom.
How much longer do they have to suffer for people
who are in prison in New Zealand for rape, murder,
armed robbery are treated
and cared for better than these pigs.
The prisoners could turn around in these cells,
stretch their legs, get fresh air, sun on their bodies,
and have a bed to sleep on.
Most of these prisoners choose to commit their crime,
but these pigs have done nothing wrong apart from being born
into a cruel world with heartless money hungry people.
Have you ever really looked into the eyes of these poor pigs
and seen the sorrow, pain, and suffering they're feeling?
Would you yourself like to live
or allow one of your loved ones to live this way?
I'm sure the answer is no. So why should these pigs?
I can't believe that we are living in the 21st century
and we are still treating animals like they're nothing.
Several cultures have gods associated with pigs
and uh, and we are containing them in
cells, uh, sorry.
And we are containing them in concrete cells
that they can't even turn around in.
Just think in Sweden, Switzerland, Norway
and European Union, they have already five years ago changed
how they house and care for their pigs.
Why can't we do the same?
Why can't we make a change and stick to it?
Animals of all walks of lives do so much for humans,
definitely way more than what we do for them.
A lot of the time all we do is cause some pain
and suffering while it's time to change all that
and actually treat them how they deserve to be treated
and do the right thing for once.
Life stock exports only had a two year transition period.
So why should the pig farmers get five
years and then another decade?
I urge you not to amend the Animal Welfare Act.
Please honor that decision and uphold the Animal Welfare Act
and not weaken to permit more animal cruelty
animals have the rights and deserve to be happy.
New Zealand has got a lot of land,
so why can't pigs live in a paddock like cows?
Why can't they feel the sun on their pink round?
Little bodies running the grass and rolling in the mud?
These pigs aren't just living, these pigs aren't living,
they're just existing.
They're so miserable and it's extremely unfair to do so.
So it's time that we stay strong
and stick to the date of the 18th of December.
The farmers have had their time now,
and now it's the time for the pigs to shine
and live. Thank you.
Oh, great submission. So much for that. That was lovely.
Um, very well written
and uh, very thoughtful, uh, uh, feelings and,
and ideas, um, members, questions for Louise.
I don't think there appear to be any questions. Louise.
Okay. Thank you so much. Submission today.
Very thoughtful submission.
We're always very grateful submission to help us form, uh,
an informed opinion about
what the constituency is feeling and thinking.
So very grateful for your time today. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Okay. Take care. Cool.
Same to you. Thanks. Bye
Bye.
Thank you, Izzy. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So you'll be meeting again at one
o'clock as the full committee.
Very good. Thank you so much for your time.
See you everyone. See you then. Cheerio. Thanks.